Add a blog post about decoupled taint eviction controller (#43676)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2023-10-24-taint-eviction-controller.md

Reviewer: Please change the date (in the filename, and also on line 4) to 2023-12-19.

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.29: Decouple TaintManager from NodeLifecycleController"
date: 2023-11-15
slug: kubernetes-1-29-taint-eviction-controller
---

**Authors:** Yuan Chen (Apple), Andrea Tosatto (Apple)

This blog discusses a new feature in Kubernetes 1.29 to improve the handling of taint-based pod eviction.

## Background

In Kubernetes 1.29, an  improvement has been introduced to enhance the handling of taint-based pod eviction on nodes. This blog discusses the changes made to the `NodeLifecycleController` to separate its responsibilities and improve overall code maintainability.

### Summary of Changes

The `NodeLifecycleController` previously combined two independent functions:

- Adding a pre-defined set of `NoExecute` taints to nodes based on the node conditions.
- Performing pod eviction on NoExecute taints

> With the latest release, the taint-based eviction implementation has been moved out of the `node-lifecycle-controller` into a separate and independent component called `TaintEvictionController`. This separation aims to disentangle code, enhance code maintainability, and facilitate future extensions to either component.

Reviewer 2: I'd add something high-lighting the benefits and the potential use-cases where this could be useful, as done in the KEP.

Author: Added the following 

### Use Cases

This new feature will allow cluster administrators to extend and enhance the default `TaintEvictionController` and even replace the default `TaintEvictionController` with a custom implementation to meet different needs, e.g., better supportof stateful workloads that use `PersistentVolume` on  local disks.

Author: Added the metrics description as follows.

As part of the change, addtitonal metrics are introduced to monitor taint-based pod evictionis.

- `pod_deletion_duration_seconds` measures th latency between the time when a taint effect has been activated for the Pod and its deletion via `TaintEvictionController`.
- `pod_deletions_total` reports the total number of Pods deleted by `TaintEvictionController` since its start

### How to Use the New Feature?

A new feature gate, `SeparateTaintManager`, has been added. To enable the new feature, users can use the following flags:

- kube-apiserver: `--feature-gates=SeparateTaintManager=true`

> - kube-controller-manager: `--controllers=kube-eviction-controller`

Reviewer 2: This is actually going to be enabled by default as the `SeparateTaintManager` feature-flag is in beta.

Author: Clarified it.

> For compatibility, the legacy `TaintManager` can still be used with the `--taint-manager` flag.

Reviewer 2: This is not correct. If users want to use the old taint-manager they need to set the feature-flag to false (e.g. `SeparateTaintManager=false`).

What this feature gives the users, is the ability to disable taint-based eviction by setting `SeparateTaintManager=true` and `--controllers=-kube-eviction-controller`.

Author: Updated it.

### FAQ

**Does this feature change the existing behavior of taint-based pod evictions?**

No, the taint-based pod eviction behavior remains unchanged. If the feature gate `SeparateTaintManager` is turned off, the legacy `NodeLifecycleController` with `TaintManager` will continue to be used.

**Will enabling/using this feature result in an increase in the time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?**

> It may slightly increase the communication overhead from applying node taints to performing pod eviction.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is correct, as setting taints and evicting Pods is already done via separated reconcilers in the old implementation. We strived to the changes to not impact Customers experience in any meaningful way.

Author: Changed it to `No`.

> **Will enabling/using this feature result in a non-negligible increase in resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?**

Reviewer 3: no-neglisible  ... can we avoid this double negating term?

Author: Removed the word `non-negligible`.

The increase in resource usage by running a separate `taint-eviction-controller` will be negligible.

### Learn More

For more details, refer to the [KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-scheduling/3902-decoupled-taint-manager/README.md).

### Acknowledgments

As with any Kubernetes feature, multiple community members have contributed, from writing the KEP to implementing the new controller and reviewing the KEP and code. Special thanks to:

> - Aldo Culquicondor (@alculquicondor)

Reviewer 2: I'd like us to add here @atiratree and @logicalhan. Their feedback on the implementation, alongside @soltysh and @Huang-Wei is what made this change possible! Thank you 🙇‍♂️!

Author: Added the names.

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.29: Decouple TaintManager from NodeLifecycleController"
date: 2023-11-15
slug: kubernetes-1-29-taint-eviction-controller
---

**Authors:** Yuan Chen (Apple), Andrea Tosatto (Apple)

This blog discusses a new feature in Kubernetes 1.29 to improve the handling of taint-based pod eviction.

## Background

In Kubernetes 1.29, an improvement has been introduced to enhance the handling of taint-based pod eviction on nodes. This blog discusses the changes made to the `NodeLifecycleController` to separate its responsibilities and improve overall code maintainability.

### Summary of Changes

The `NodeLifecycleController` previously combined two independent functions:

- Adding a pre-defined set of `NoExecute` taints to nodes based on the node conditions.
- Performing pod eviction on NoExecute taints

> With the Kubernetes 1.29 release, the taint-based eviction implementation has been moved out of the `node-lifecycle-controller` into a separate and independent component called `TaintEvictionController`. This separation aims to disentangle code, enhance code maintainability, and facilitate future extensions to either component.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With the Kubernetes 1.29 release, the taint-based eviction implementation has been
moved out of the `node-lifecycle-controller` into a separate and independent component called `TaintEvictionController`.
This separation aims to disentangle code, enhance code maintainability,
and facilitate future extensions to either component.
```

As part of the change, additional metrics are introduced to monitor taint-based pod evictions.

- `pod_deletion_duration_seconds` measures th latency between the time when a taint effect has been activated for the Pod and its deletion via `TaintEvictionController`.
- `pod_deletions_total` reports the total number of Pods deleted by `TaintEvictionController` since its start.

### How to Use the New Feature?

A new feature gate, `SeparateTaintEvictionController`, has been added. The feature is enabled by default as Beta in Kubernetes 1.29.  

> When this feature is enabled, users can optionally disable taint-based eviction by setting `--controllers=-taint-eviction-controller` in Kube Controller Manager.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When this feature is enabled, users can optionally disable taint-based eviction by setting `--controllers=-taint-eviction-controller`
in Kube Controller Manager.
```

To disable the new feature and use the old  `TaintManager` within `NodeLifecycleController` , users can set `SeparateTaintEvictionController=false`. 

### Use Cases

> This new feature will allow cluster administrators to extend and enhance the default `TaintEvictionController` and even replace the default `TaintEvictionController` with a custom implementation to meet different needs. An example is to better support stateful workloads that use `PersistentVolume` on  local disks. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This new feature will allow cluster administrators to extend and enhance the default
`TaintEvictionController` and even replace the default `TaintEvictionController` with a
custom implementation to meet different needs. An example is to better support
stateful workloads that use `PersistentVolume` on  local disks. 
```

### FAQ

**Does this feature change the existing behavior of taint-based pod evictions?**

> No, the taint-based pod eviction behavior remains unchanged. If the feature gate `SeparateTaintEvictionController` is turned off, the legacy `NodeLifecycleController` with `TaintManager` will continue to be used.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
No, the taint-based pod eviction behavior remains unchanged. If the feature gate
`SeparateTaintEvictionController` is turned off, the legacy `NodeLifecycleController`
with `TaintManager` will continue to be used.
```

**Will enabling/using this feature result in an increase in the time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?**

No.

**Will enabling/using this feature result in an increase in resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...)?**

The increase in resource usage by running a separate `taint-eviction-controller` will be negligible.

### Learn More

For more details, refer to the [KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-scheduling/3902-decoupled-taint-manager/README.md).

### Acknowledgments

> As with any Kubernetes feature, multiple community members have contributed, from writing the KEP to implementing the new controller and reviewing the KEP and code. Special thanks to:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As with any Kubernetes feature, multiple community members have contributed, from
writing the KEP to implementing the new controller and reviewing the KEP and code. Special thanks to:
```

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.29: Decouple TaintManager from NodeLifecycleController"
date: 2023-11-15
slug: kubernetes-1-29-taint-eviction-controller
---

**Authors:** Yuan Chen (Apple), Andrea Tosatto (Apple)

This blog discusses a new feature in Kubernetes 1.29 to improve the handling of taint-based pod eviction.

## Background

> In Kubernetes 1.29, an improvement has been introduced to enhance the handling of taint-based pod eviction on nodes. This blog discusses the changes made to the `NodeLifecycleController` to separate its responsibilities and improve overall code maintainability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes 1.29, an improvement has been introduced to enhance the handling of taint-based pod eviction on nodes.
This blog discusses the changes made to the node lifecycle controller to separate its responsibilities and improve overall code maintainability.
```

### Summary of Changes

The `NodeLifecycleController` previously combined two independent functions:

- Adding a pre-defined set of `NoExecute` taints to nodes based on the node conditions.
- Performing pod eviction on NoExecute taints

With the Kubernetes 1.29 release, the taint-based eviction implementation has been
moved out of the `node-lifecycle-controller` into a separate and independent component called `TaintEvictionController`.
This separation aims to disentangle code, enhance code maintainability,
and facilitate future extensions to either component.

As part of the change, additional metrics are introduced to monitor taint-based pod evictions.

> - `pod_deletion_duration_seconds` measures th latency between the time when a taint effect has been activated for the Pod and its deletion via `TaintEvictionController`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `pod_deletion_duration_seconds` measures the latency between the time when a taint effect has been activated for a Pod and its deletion by the taint eviction controller.
```
Is this a counter metric? How do the labels work / where can people read more? (eg: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/instrumentation/metrics/)

A new feature gate, `SeparateTaintEvictionController`, has been added. The feature is enabled by default as Beta in Kubernetes 1.29.  

> When this feature is enabled, users can optionally disable taint-based eviction by setting `--controllers=-taint-eviction-controller`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When this feature is enabled, users can optionally disable taint-based eviction by setting
`--controllers=-taint-eviction-controller` on the `kube-controller-manager`.
```
